Welcome to this special update.
Pure worship is under attack
in the country of Russia.
In this program, we will update you
on our efforts to defend
God’s precious Word, the Bible,
from those who
would seek to ban it in Russia.
We will interview a brother
who was present in the courtroom
for the recent appeal hearing
regarding the New World Translation
of the Holy Scriptures.
We will also update
you on the court case
to seize the property
of our branch office in Russia
and show you what has recently taken place
to seize the Assembly Hall complex
in St. Petersburg.
As you may be aware,
on December 20,
the Leningrad Regional Court
denied our appeal of a decision
to ban the Russian-language
New World Translation,
declaring it an “extremist” publication.
This is against Russian law.
Specifically,
according to an amendment to Article 3
of the Federal Law on Extremism,
signed by President Putin himself
in the fall of 2015:
“The Bible, the Koran,
“the Tanakh, and the Kangyur,
“their contents and quotations from them
cannot be recognized as extremist materials.”
With such a clear law like that in force,
any reasonable person would wonder,
‘How could a Russian court ban a Bible?’
We are pleased to have
with us Brother Moses Ajiboye,
who was present in the courtroom
for the recent appeal hearing.
Moses, it’s good to see you.
Welcome.
Thank you, Mark.
It’s a privilege to be with you.
Now, Moses,
before we discuss the appeal hearing,
could you help us
understand how the proceedings
against the New World Translation
have unfolded up until now?
Yes, Mark.
This case began back on August 13, 2015,
after a prosecutor filed a claim
to declare the New World Translation
in Russian to be “extremist.”
At the beginning of the trial
back then in April 2016,
the prosecutor demanded
that the court request an “expert” study
from a panel of “experts”
who have consistently provided
biased reports
against Jehovah’s Witnesses in the past.
Their so-called studies have been refuted
by other unbiased scientific experts as well.
Well, the judge
then ruled to adjourn the case
and allow time
for this “expert” study of the Bible.
The study was completed
and submitted to the court
more than a year later
on May 22, 2017.
As expected,
the biased study
was full of outrageous statements
that were not based on the facts.
The study even concluded
that the New World Translation
was not a Bible,
since it did not say “Bible” on the cover.
So in late July 2017,
the court resumed its hearings of the case.
Well, Moses, can you tell us
what it was like in the courtroom
when the trial resumed in July?
Over a period of 4 days,
there were 30 hours of court hearings.
During that time,
our attorneys exposed
the so-called expert study
and its key claims as unfounded, biased,
absurd, inconsistent, and invalid.
Our attorneys proved
that the New World Translation is consistent
with other Russian Bible translations
by having many verses read
in two or more Bible translations
for comparison.
In fact, some 25 Bible passages
were read in the courtroom.
On one occasion, Mark,
the judge selected a verse
in the New World Translation
that may have appeared
to him as controversial
and asked our lawyer to explain it.
Of course, our lawyer simply asked
that the verse be read
in all three different translations.
And after that,
they all had the same idea
and no further explanation was needed.
One of our attorneys described the scene
in the courtroom this way,
and I will quote him, Mark, if I may.
He said: “Yesterday,
the judge read a great many scriptures
“from various translations of the Bible:
“the New World Translation,
the synodal translation,
“the modern translation, and others.
“Many scriptures were read about family life,
“raising children, and loving our neighbors.
“We read Psalm 23
“in three different translations
for comparison.
“The judge himself read all the scriptures.
“Just imagine the scene:
“the courtroom, two prosecutors,
“three attorneys, and the audience.
“In the center of the table sits the judge
“with five to seven
translations of the Bible.
“The judge opens
the various Bible translations,
“reads aloud, and asks questions.
“It was a stunning picture!
It reminded us
of a well-prepared Bible study.”
Well, that’s just incredible, Moses!
Well, what were some of the ways
that God’s Word
was attacked during this hearing,
and how did our brothers
put up a defense for the Bible?
Yes, the so-called experts attacked
the use of God’s holy name, Jehovah,
in the New World Translation.
The “expert” study states:
“In the New World Translation
of the Holy Scriptures,
“the dominant factor of the text
is the ‘Jehovah’ concept.
“The ‘Jehovah’ concept
expresses a personified god
“with such names as ‘Jehovah God,’
“‘Jehovah of armies,’
‘the King, Jehovah of armies,’
“‘the Holy One of Israel,’ et cetera.
“Thus, in the opinion
of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
“he has the personal name ‘Jehovah.’
“So the New World Translation
of the Holy Scriptures
“does not qualify as a Christian Bible
but is an independent text.”
So in order to expose this attack,
the lawyers introduced to the court
ten other Russian Bibles
that use the name Jehovah.
They allowed—
They also showed the court poetry
by renowned Russian poets
Tsvetaeva and Pushkin;
and books by Kuprin,
Goncharov, and Dostoyevsky;
and excerpts
from other classic Russian literature
where the name Jehovah is used.
They also pointed to the 19th-century
Russian-language Makarios Bible,
produced by Russian Orthodox
Church translators,
in which the name Jehovah occurs
more than 3,500 times.
Oh, Moses, it’s so good
to hear that the brothers
were able to defend
Jehovah’s holy name in the courtroom.
Well, were the brothers
able to interview any experts
who could also defend God’s name?
defend the Bible?
Yes, Mark,
the court allowed two experts
to present testimony.
Regarding the use of God’s name,
Professor Mikhail Odintsov,
a religious scholar well respected in Russia
who is not one of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
confirmed in front of the court
that the name Jehovah
has been used
by other Russian translations
and translators as well,
including the translators
of the official Bible translation
of the Russian Orthodox Church
where the divine name,
Jehovah, occurs some ten times.
Professor Odintsov read
two verses from the church Bible
that contains God’s personal name, Jehovah.
He also mentioned
two Orthodox Church translators,
namely, Pavsky and Makarii,
who both used God’s name, Jehovah,
extensively in their translations.
Professor Odintsov
gave a thorough explanation
regarding the history
and meaning of the name Jehovah
as well as the long history
of its use in Bible translation
and in the literature of Christendom.
Thus, he completely refuted their attack
on Jehovah’s name
in the New World Translation.
Excellent!
Well, what a powerful defense
for God’s name, Jehovah!
Well, now, didn’t you also say, Moses,
that these so-called experts
had said that the New World Translation
was not a Bible because the word
“Bible” did not appear on the cover?
Yes, Mark, that’s right.
The study also claimed
that the New World Translation is not a Bible
because it does not expressly say
that it is a Bible.
However, Professor Odintsov
explained to the court
that in line with scientific criteria,
the words “Scriptures” and “Holy Scriptures”
are quite appropriate to describe the Bible.
In addition,
our lawyers explained to the court
that they were amazed
that the court-appointed so-called experts
claimed to have worked for 287 days
on their research
and yet missed the simple fact
that in the third paragraph
of the Bible’s Foreword,
on page 5, it clearly states:
“This new translation of the Bible.”
Well, that’s just unbelievable, Moses.
What other arguments
did these so-called experts
try to use against God’s Word, the Bible?
Well, the “expert” study also claimed
that Jehovah’s Witnesses
do not recognize Jesus Christ
as the savior of mankind.
But the first paragraph of the Foreword
to the New World Translation Russian edition
says exactly the opposite
and quotes John 3:16.
The “experts” also claimed
that the New World Translation is not a Bible
because it allegedly has been modified
to refute the doctrine of the Trinity.
Yet, our lawyers read
from the Russian Orthodox
Church Synodal version,
two verses from that translation,
1 Corinthians 11:3, where it says:
“The head of the Christ is God”
and John 14:28, where Jesus said:
“For the Father is greater than I am.”
So these two verses show
that the official
Russian Orthodox Church Bible
also refutes the Trinity doctrine.
We could go on and on, Mark.
But the fact is that the lower court ruled
to ban the New World Translation,
and so we appealed to a higher court.
And the appeal hearing
was held on December 20, 2017,
as you rightly said in the beginning.
Well, Moses,
could you tell us a little bit
about the appeal hearing
that took place in December?
I know you were in the courtroom.
What was it like?
As during the first trials,
foreign diplomats from at least four nations
(Britain, Netherlands,
Switzerland, and the United States)
attended the December 20, 2017,
appeal hearing.
Again, there were many brothers
and sisters present in the courtroom
because they cared so much
about the New World Translation.
At the appeal hearing,
when none of the three so-called experts
could explain the methods
they used to carry out their study,
the court itself intervened
and ended the questioning of the “experts.”
In fact, Ms. Kryukova,
one of the three “experts,”
made a very revealing statement
when she said that the only book
that can be called a Bible
is one approved
by the Russian Orthodox Church
and that “is marked
‘by the blessing of the patriarch’
or that matches word for word
with such a translation.”
When asked, Ms. Kryukova
refused to state why she believed
that the New World Translation
is “extremist,”
calling this a legal question.
So you see, Mark,
neither the prosecutors
nor the so-called experts
who were questioned
could cite even one verse
as an example of “extremism”
in the New World Translation Bible.
Thus, again and again
our attorneys exposed
the outrageous and false claims
of these so-called experts.
Our attorneys presented a total
of 35 scholarly documents
containing overwhelming evidence
to prove that the New World Translation Bible
is truly the Word of God.
But these were all ignored by the court.
So again and again we had the impression,
sitting there in the courtroom, Mark,
that the purpose
of the hearing was not to find out
the facts, evidence, et cetera,
but, rather,
to go through the legal formalities quickly,
since the decision had already been made
and must be announced today.
In fact,
the judges deliberated
on the seven hours of testimony
for only four minutes
before announcing their decision
to ban the New World Translation.
Well, Moses, thank you so much
for sharing this powerful defense
that our brothers made
in behalf of Jehovah’s holy name
and his precious Word, the Bible.
We appreciate this report so much.
Thank you, Mark.
It was a privilege
to be there with the brothers
in the courtroom in St. Petersburg.
The attack on pure worship in Russia
includes an outright ban
on our activities in that land.
Now the authorities are moving forward
in seizing properties
owned by Jehovah’s people.
For example,
on December 7, 2017,
a hearing was held
in the Sestroretsk District Court
regarding the seizing
of the Russia branch property
at Solnechnoye.
Brother Richard Devine,
a member of the board of directors
of the Watch Tower Bible
and Tract Society of Pennsylvania,
had the privilege of being
in attendance at the hearing.
Richard, it’s good to see you.
Welcome.
Thank you, Mark.
It’s a pleasure to be here.
Could you tell us a little bit
about the nature of this hearing
that you went to Russia to attend?
Sure.
When the Administrative Center
of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Russia
was declared “extremist”
late last year by the courts,
it gave the government the ability
to seize
the Administrative Center’s property.
However, when they tried
to seize the Bethel complex,
they found out that it legally belonged,
not to the Administrative Center,
but actually to the Watch Tower Bible
and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
and that for 17 years,
the Administrative Center
had been merely a tenant.
Since the Pennsylvania Corporation
hadn’t been banned,
this created a legal obstacle
for the government in seizing our property.
So, what argument
did the government use
to try to justify the seizure
of the branch property?
Well, the government was trying to prove
that the transfer of title of the property
to the Pennsylvania Corporation
17 years ago wasn’t valid
and that the Bethel property
still really belonged
to the Administrative Center,
and therefore it was
fair game for them to seize it.
Richard,
can you tell us what it was like
to be there in the courtroom
for this very historic hearing?
Well, a couple of things
really impressed me very much.
One was the courage of the local brothers
and sisters who came to the hearing
despite the ban just to support
the brothers presenting our case.
It was truly a remarkable demonstration
of strong faith and determination.
The hearing was held
in a small, drab room
in Sestroretsk, a town not far
from the former Bethel facility.
There was barely room
for everyone to fit inside.
Our attorneys and the prosecutors
were literally two feet apart,
facing each other over a small table.
The brothers and sisters
crammed into any space they could find,
some even sitting inside the barred cell
reserved for criminal defendants.
Well now, Richard, what can you
tell us about the hearing itself?
What actually took place in the courtroom?
Well, I knew from meeting
with them the night before
how well our attorneys
prepared for this case
and how hard they worked on it.
And to see them both
—one a relatively young brother—
courageously stand up
and defend the interests of Jehovah’s people,
it was really an amazing sight.
They had real conviction and passion.
They demonstrated unequivocally
that according to Russian law,
the international business law,
and the provisions
of the European Convention on Human Rights
that they were squarely
in our favor
and that to seize our property
was not only legally wrong
but it was really morally wrong.
The prosecutors, on the other hand,
appeared to be not long out of high school
and limited themselves to reading
a few short prewritten statements
and asked no questions during the hearing.
Well now, Richard, what was it like
when the decision
was finally read in the courtroom?
Well, I don’t think the decision
was really a surprise to anyone.
However, it seemed to me that the judge
was very uncomfortable reading that verdict.
At the end,
she announced that there would be
30 days to file an appeal.
Now, the spirit of the brothers
and sisters leaving the courtroom
was somber at first.
But once we were out in the hallway,
the conversations got going;
the brothers and sisters
began congratulating the attorneys
for the fine witness they had given.
Once again, they were all smiling,
laughing, hugging,
and even giving little gifts to one another.
They were once again just happy
to be together serving Jehovah.
Well, then, what happens now?
Where do we go from here, Richard?
Well, the brothers are planning
to file an appeal within the given time.
And if this first appeal goes against us,
then the property
will be seized by the government
and used for other purposes.
However, further appeals, possibly even
to the European Court of Human Rights,
will be pursued.
Richard, thank you very, very much
for giving us that report.
And even more,
we want to thank you
for the courage that you
demonstrated in going to Russia
to stand with our brothers
during that hearing.
It really was my privilege.
Thank you.
However,
the seizure of our other properties
has already begun in Russia.
For example,
on December 14, 2017,
just after 9:00 a.m.,
about 40 people,
including police and others,
appeared outside the Assembly Hall
of Jehovah’s Witnesses
in St. Petersburg.
Some of the men were armed
with automatic weapons,
and others had the tools
needed to forcibly enter
the locked Assembly Hall compound.
Thankfully, none of our brothers
were inside the Assembly Hall
during this raid.
Russian news agencies have reported
that based on the Russian Supreme
Court ruling earlier this year,
the government has seized the property
and has transferred it
to the neighboring medical center
for use as a lecture hall.
They have already posted
a new sign on the gate.
In addition to these actions,
you may be wondering
about our Brother Dennis Christensen
who has been in pretrial detention
since May 25, 2017.
The court has extended
his pretrial detention several times.
Most recently, on December 22, 2017,
the court extended his detention
until February 23, 2018.
The authorities are allowing
Brother Christensen’s wife
to visit him now twice a month.
We expect that his trial
will begin sometime
in the coming weeks.
What can we say, brothers,
about this attack on pure worship in Russia?
Jehovah foretold
that during Christ’s presence,
‘the kings of the earth and high officials
would take their stand
against Jehovah and his anointed one.’
We find that in Psalm 2:1-3.
Thus, we are not surprised
to see this direct attack
on Jehovah’s name;
his precious Word, the Bible;
and his faithful worshippers on this earth.
We must keep in our minds
the warning from our Lord Jesus
when he said at Matthew 10:17-22:
“Be on your guard against men,
“for they will hand you over to local courts
“and they will scourge
you in their synagogues.
“And you will be brought
before governors and kings for my sake,
“for a witness to them and the nations.
“However, when they hand you over,
“do not become anxious
about how or what you are to speak,
“for what you are to speak
will be given you in that hour;
“for the ones speaking are not just you,
“but it is the spirit of your Father
that speaks by you.
“Further, brother will hand
brother over to death,
“and a father his child,
“and children will rise up against parents
“and will have them put to death.
“And you will be hated by all people
“on account of my name,
“but the one who has endured to the end
will be saved.”
Yes, as Jesus said,
all who endure faithfully
will ultimately be saved.
Jehovah stated through his prophet
at Ezekiel 39:7:
“The nations will have to know
that I am Jehovah.”
Soon, Jehovah will act
in behalf of all his servants who,
despite opposition
and adverse circumstances,
prove that they are truly
“a people for his name.”
This is JW Broadcasting
from the world headquarters
of Jehovah’s Witnesses.